[Music]
a nuclear-armed state on the brink of
collapse it's the stuff of nightmares
but it is slowly becoming Pakistan's
waking reality its import dependent
economy has run out of Foreign Exchange
causing food and energy shortages and
the resulting economic hardship is
driving political polarization
radicalization and extremism such
developments would be troubling anywhere
but for nuclear-armed Pakistan domestic
instability feeds into wider border
disputes with India and Afghanistan who
may look to advance their territorial
claims and the consequent escalation
could destabilize South Asia potentially
dragging the world down with it
into the bargain is a looming death
crisis Islamabad is in hook to the IMF
the World Bank China and others
meanwhile the military is watching
events closely with many fearing another
coup Pakistani Society thus needs cooler
heads and agile policy making to claw
its way out because while economics is a
gun politics is knowing when to pull the
trigger
foreign
[Music]
[Music]
to create a nation's money is to control
its Destiny in 1835 the British Empire
established a uniform currency for
Colonial India seeking to reap the
benefits of senior age and control the
means of paying taxes and crucially
debts
little has changed since Pakistan became
independent in 1947 but the destiny of
its 230 million citizens depends on
foreign currency to import Essentials
like food energy and fertilizers
for years though more foreign exchange
has flowed out of Pakistan than in
prompting Islamabad to run persistent
fiscal and current account deficits and
in 2022 circumstances took a turn for
the worse as Russia invaded Ukraine
global commodity prices sword placing
pressure on Pakistan's Forex reserves
soon thereafter Mass flooding along the
Indus inundated one-third of the country
devastating both subsistent farms and
Export crops the resulting double whammy
increased Pakistan's import dependence
while depriving it of export income and
burdening the state with an additional
15 billion dollars repair bill which
equals roughly four percent of the GDP
by January 2023 currency reserves were
sufficient only for several weeks of
imports Islamabad responded by opposing
blackouts raising tariffs on energy
insufficient Imports and leaving food
and raw material shipments in Port well
this clampdown stamped the payments
outflow it cost production cuts and
Industrial decline the textile industry
accounting for one-tenth of Pakistan's
GDP and two-fifths of employment laid
off 7 million workers meanwhile
factories saw gas bills raise production
costs making local products
uncompetitive on global markets
economic privation has heightened
political tensions within Pakistan and
with its creditors islamabad's current
IMF program began in 2019 under Imran
Khan's Premiership as a cricket player
Khan was no stranger to spin but not
even he could Square his populist
credentials with the imf's austerity
demands Khan was eventually ousted from
power in a no-confidence vote but not
before he threw dirt at his political
opponents and gasoline on Pakistan's
political bonfire now the resulting
crisis could force Pakistan to
transition to a market determined
exchange rate and halt energy subsidies
thus raising inflation lowering
consumption and inducing a recession
but such measures may only radicalize a
society where the cost of living is
starting to outweigh the benefits and
with few Democratic Avenues available
militancy is surging extremist attacks
Rose by 27 in 2022 culminating in one of
the country's most deadliest attacks
ever at the Peshawar mosque in January
this year moreover jihadism in Pakistan
is inextricably linked to territorial
disputes the Pakistani and Afghan
Taliban de facto reject the validity of
the Durant line a British colonial era
border that bisects pashtun territories
yet as a jurisdictional shield the
Border allows for militant incursions
into Pakistani territory and should the
country crumble internally the Taliban
will look to leverage nationalist
sentiment among Pakistan's 40 million
ethnic pashtoons located chiefly in
hybrapaktankwa to push for diplomatic
recognition or increased pashtune
autonomy
such events could Ripple out to
neighboring Balochistan which has been
plagued by separatist militants since
1948.
local separatist groups claimed the
province is neglected and underdeveloped
and given its large hydrocarbon and gold
reserves a weakened central government
May swell the ranks of separatist forces
wishing to break away from Pakistan if
both the pashtun and Balochi territories
were to Rebel there wouldn't be much
left of Pakistan but the greatest threat
to South Asian stability would be the
status of Pakistan's nuclear Arsenal as
of 2021 Islamabad was assessed to have
165 nuclear warheads four plutonium
production reactors and expanded uranium
enrichment infrastructure and new
Delivery Systems in development in a
collapse scenario non-state actors Rogue
agencies factions or individuals would
have ample scope to pilfer nuclear
assets worse they could be sold off if
Pakistani weapons or nuclear technology
fell into unscrupulous hands and given
the likely arise in separatist and
jihadist militancy there would be no
shortage of potential buyers Pakistani
collapse would thus proliferate nuclear
weapons worldwide
equally troubling would be an
india-pakistan confrontation with the
most likely Flashpoint being Kashmir
though mutually assured destruction
theoretically the terrorists nuclear
States from direct conflict in Kashmir
this theory has been empirically tested
in 1999 both States fought a war over
the District of Cargill and to this day
both sides monitor the regional balance
of power carefully should Pakistan lose
its military capacity to a domestic
crisis India may be tempted to advance
its interests across the line of control
yet nuclear Communications between the
two states are poor there is no red
telephone this increases the possibility
of miscommunication and miscalculation
and this would heighten the risk of
nuclear confrontation especially if New
Delhi cannot ascertain which Pakistani
policy organs have the authority to
negotiate or if Islamabad cannot
reliably account for all its nuclear
assets in that case the potential
conflict could have Global consequences
Pakistan's crisis therefore is the
world's problem and preventing a spiral
of radicalization and instability means
first solving the economic crisis
reducing military spending pursuing
economic diversification and reducing
import dependency will help but the
Bedrock issue is the foreign debt
Pakistan's geopolitical importance
during the Cold War and the Afghan
conflict granted access to nearly
endless loans and bailouts from the IMF
and other Western institutions yet the
sums involved were Beyond Pakistan's
repayment capacity and most importantly
they were denominated in foreign
currency this fact has far-reaching
implications for Pakistan's economic
life though the country May avoid the
fault in the short run long term it's
growing 130 billion dollar stock of
external debt in is unsustainable
service on Pakistan's dollar denominated
obligations is 26 billion dollars for
2023 which drains the foreign exchange
that is needed for essential Imports
harsh austerity demands may also prove
self-defeating should they push
Pakistani politics further into crisis
thus the only viable solution is for the
creditors to take haircuts restructure
the residual death postpone immediate
interest payments and ensure New Capital
flows otherwise the concrete choose of
the external debt will drag Pakistan
down for closing any chance of recovery
yet death restructuring negotiations are
not without subterfuge especially since
Pakistan's external debt structure
carries geopolitical implications
since 2014 the proportion owed to
private creditors including commercial
Banks and bondholders has risen from 19
to 30 percent these entities care little
about Foreign Affairs and even less
about Pakistan and they will likely
frustrate any debt resolution effort
that does not pay them out in full
meanwhile
western-dominated multilateral creditors
like the IMF the World Bank but also the
Asian development Bank hold around
one-third of Pakistan's external debt
but they maintain that the write down
would hurt their credit rating and thus
their ability to discharge their
functions
that leaves China holding the bag
Beijing is islamabad's largest bilateral
creditor holding one-fifth of its
external death it is also Pakistan's
best hope for death forgiveness since
Pakistan could negotiate a write down
one-on-one there is also a qualitative
difference since the Chinese death
pertains to tangible infrastructure
projects like the china-pakistan
economic Corridor which connects
xinjiang with guadaluport through
Pakistan reducing trade dependence on
the Malacca Strait
having sunk 65 billion dollars into such
projects a stable Pakistan is crucial to
Chinese interests and given a rise in
attacks targeting Chinese Nationals and
the threat of jihadism spilling into
xinjiang Beijing is unlikely to force
Islamabad to repay its loans doing so
would harm the Chinese position on the
grand geopolitical chessboard yet China
did not become a great power by making
unilateral concessions so some parallel
compromises from Western creditors even
if symbolic may be needed to grease the
wheels of death forgiveness
ultimately Pakistan's crisis could
quickly become everyone's problem should
it spiral out of control the country is
on the brink of Economic and political
collapse and while Pakistan's nuclear
Arsenal makes it too big to fail its
foreign debt burden is too big for it to
succeed
for the moment creditors hold the whip
him but soon even they may consider that
forgiveness not as an act of Charity but
as a concession to realism as it turns
out death that cannot be repaid won't be
repaid
I've been your host Shivam from Caspian
report researching this video and going
through piles of data was a bit tricky
we live in a data-driven world and
having the skills to analyze large sums
of data is more important now than in
the past Math and Science are the
primary tools that help us understand
our information driven reality but Math
and Science don't come so easily
sometimes even I struggle with it but
then I went through an introductionary
course on data analysis Fundamentals by
brilliant.org it took me through the
basics I knew tested my understanding
along the way and explained the correct
answers in detail anytime I got
something wrong the neat thing is the
courses are designed to level up your
knowledge base steadily it's the best
way to learn math and science
interactively and you can take the
course I did on data analysis
fundamentals or one of the thousands of
other lessons ranging from foundational
and advanced math to AI data science
neural networks and more with new
lessons added monthly and best of all
you can try out everything brilliant.org
has to offer completely free for a full
30 Days by visiting brilliant.org
Caspian report or just click the link in
the description the first 200 people
using our link will get 20 off
Brilliance annual premium subscription
the that's a pretty good deal and
investment in knowledge pays the best
interest
and as usual thank you for watching and
Sarah